== NAME ==

editor - text editor plugins

== DESCRIPTION ==

The 'editor' directory contains plugins and add-ons for several popular text
editors. They include syntax-highlighting, automatic indenting, Ctags, etc.

A summary of available plugins can be found by running:
    `cd editor && make help`

+ Vim +

By default, calling `make vim-install` in the 'editor' directory will install
several files into ~/.vim. You can use the 'VIM_DIR' variable on the command
line when calling `make` to choose a different target directory for the vim
files. For example:

   `make vim-install [VIM_DIR=/vim_files_target_directory]`

All these files have the .vim extension: pir.vim (generated from pir_vim.in),
pasm.vim, and pmc.vim are syntax files; indent_pir.vim is an indent plugin;
and filetype_parrot.vim is a filetype script that tells vim to associate the
extensions .pir, .pasm, and .pmc with the right syntax. The syntax files are
installed to ~/.vim/syntax; filetype_parrot.vim is installed to
~/.vim/parrot.vim; and indent_pir.vim is copied to ~/.vim/indent/pir.vim. If
you want indenting, you should also place "filetype indent on" somewhere in
your ~/.vimrc file.

+ Kate +

There is a syntax file for the KDE editor Kate, but it is not built by default.
You must run:

   `make imc.kate`

in the 'editor' directory to build it.

Copy the imcc.xml file to ~/.kde/share/apps/katepart/syntax.

+ Emacs +

The parrot.el file describes the changes to 'c-mode' and 'cperl-mode' required
to edit Parrot source code.  Copy parrot.el to a directory where Emacs looks
for external packages and add the following to your ~/.emacs file:

    (load "parrot")

Alternatively, to automatically track future changes, you may wish to add this
to ~/.emacs instead:

    (load-file "/<path-to-parrot>/editor/parrot.el")

Also included is pasm.pl for editing PASM source files. Copy pasm.el to a
directory where Emacs looks for external packages and add the following to your
~/.emacs file:

    (load "pasm")

To associate .pasm files with this major mode, add the following to your
~/.emacs file:

    (add-to-list 'auto-mode-alist (cons "\\.pasm\\'" 'pasm-mode))

Alternatively, you may type 'M-x pasm-mode' for every file that you want to use
the major mode in.

Additionally, you might also want to add the following to your ~/.emacs file:

    (add-hook 'pasm-mode-hook
              (function (lambda ()
                          (setq indent-tabs-mode nil))))

This prevents the odd behavior that has been noted when using tabs in the
PASM mode.

+ Ctags +

The main Makefile (not the one in 'editor'), includes several targets for
generating a tags file. The Exuberant Ctags package must be installed first.

For Vim-compatible tags, run:

  `make tags-vi`

For Emacs-compatible tags, run:

  `make tags-emacs`

There is also the 'tags-xemacs' target which will work with the older XEmacs
etags (21.5*). Run:

  `make tags-xemacs`

== COPYRIGHT ==

Copyright (C) 2001-2011, Parrot Foundation.

